---
aliases:
  - discomfort
  - uncomfortable
  - respect
  - consent
tags:
  - rule
  - metanarrative
  - result
---
***Disambiguation: Both [[Discomfort|consent]] and [[Discomfort|respect]] also link to this article. Please read carefully. This article discusses serious and uncomfortable topics potentially inappropriate for readers under the age of 18. We are not shy about the language used in this article.***
*Laconic: Players should be able to consent and refuse to participate in uncomfortable scenes.*

**Discomfort** is a [[Results]] that occurs when a [[Cues|Cue]] or [[Statements|Statement]] could cause a [[Players|Player]] to be too uncomfortable to continue. There are many ways a Player could become uncomfortable; **excessively violent, gross or sexual content** is likely to start ringing alarm bells. There's nothing inherently wrong with a [[Narratives|Narrative]] containing upsetting material; life is complicated, and people are capable of extremely weird or even terrible things if left to their own devices. With that said, a Player should *not* be asked to play through an uncomfortable scene just because it 'makes sense' in [[Canons|Canon]]. Players should *always* have the **ability to consent.**

How can Directors ensure Players *will* consent to a Scene containing objectionable materials? Firstly, Directors should be willing to tone down the content in a Scene if the Table expresses discomfort. Subjects such as rape, genocide, war, murder, racism, sexism and homophobia are likely to cause Players to pause. Some of them have *lived experiences* which echo these experiences; one in three women have experienced a non-consensual sexual encounter, often with someone they trusted or a family friend. Asking a Player who has been taken advantage of to make a deal with an Actor who traffics women for sex is, to put it lightly, **inconsiderate.**

With that said, Directors need to grasp the boundaries of themselves and their Players without flatly asking if they've been abused before; the goal of a Director is not to dredge through uncomfortable memories, but to respect their Players preemptively. We recommend that, during the first session and at least once a year, Directors sit the Table down and learn what makes the Players uncomfortable. **The Director should voice their own boundaries,** and invite the rest of the Players to do the same.

Write down the *strictest* boundaries in each category; sexual content, violent content, obscene content and hate speech. Then, simply avoid mentioning those subjects in Narratives in future play. With that said, avoiding triggers and uncomfortable scenes is easier said than done.

Players are fighting against [[Fascists]], and Fascists have done every uncomfortable thing in the book. In the Zoot Suit Riots of the 1940s, Fascists stripped children naked in the street and savaged them. In World War II, Fascists committed the systematic, race-motivated rape, murder and genocide of millions. In modern America, Fascists have successfully perpetuated a culture of racism, sex trafficking and pedophilia and intend to deport and torture millions of Americans for their own sadistic pleasure. Life is uncomfortable, and Fascists need to be dealt with to create a better world; Fascists are *uncomfortable* to confront, and they do not hide their inherent evil.

How can we talk about the evil of the Fascist without espousing their terrible ideas? How can Directors avoid verbalizing the vile dreams of the Fascist and making the Table uncomfortable?

For each category, we've described some potential ways to talk about uncomfortable material in an appropriate manner for a group that is uncomfortable with that subject matter. Should content matter that the Table has already prohibited need to be discussed, hopefully these guidelines will enable a mature (and potentially age-appropriate) conversation with Players. These are, in part, exercises for the reader; once you've grasped one technique for discussing serious topics without endorsing them or causing discomfort, you should be able to apply those same methods in different ways with other uncomfortable topics. Above all else, respect the boundaries of the Table. Ensure that they are actually comfortable with the subject matter being discussed in broad terms; if they are not, do not engage with these techniques either.

## Discussing Violent Topics
Starting with the easiest of the four categories to break down, we'll take a look at violence and violent content. This can include, but is not limited to, assault, murder, hostage-taking, threats of violence, gore, cannibalism, genocide and other shows of force. Violence is present in most media; children are acclimated with violence from a young age, though the violence they see lacks the blood and gore of adult horror films. Heroes wield swords and slash through their enemies in often bloodless combat, and as we age we are desensitized against that violence.

Violence is *common*, and that is why it will be rare to see a Table which sees simple violence as a boundary. Most Tables are fine, fundamentally, with the idea of death, of violence and gun-play. They will not be squeamish about the very concept of killing goblins and ghouls, but they will be particular about how brutal those deaths are allowed to be. Understanding where their tolerance for bloodshed and gore lies should be the goal when discussing violent content at your Table.

For children, try to offer age appropriate forms of violence. Children are unlikely to be exposed to gore and other gruesome details; with that said, you don't need to shy away from the substance of violence itself. Children will accept that there is a hungry, man-eating monster and will not question the logistics of cannibalism; they will accept someone can be shot with a gun and die. Children are not afraid of violence in the ways adults are afraid of violence; they believe themselves to be invincible, that their heroes will never come to serious harm. Keeping their injuries to no more than a bruise or some cuts helps children protect their innocent worldview, though children could no doubt be cajoled into losing an arm or a leg as long as you offered them a cool prosthetic afterwards. They are, in many ways, the easiest Players to please.

When it comes to adults, many of us have experienced violence, both as victim and as perpetrator. Some have abusive relationships with their parents, some have been violently mugged and deprived of their belongings; other times, adults have been hit by cars, or taken into custody. A good number of adults are veterans, soldiers who fought and who killed-- who watched their friends and comrades die. For an adult, violence is a very real, very personal part of their life. Understanding your Table means recognizing when a violent scene is likely hitting close to home and pulling away from the Scene to speak to the Table as a group.

Simply choosing *not* to describe events as being violent, gory and nasty is the easiest way to avoid upsetting the Table. Instead of taking detailed descriptions of anatomy as it twists and deforms under pressure, using flowery poetry can accomplish the same goals. Consider substituting a phrase such as 'blown off their head, skullcap and grey matter splashing against the carpet' with another phrase such as 'the shot landed and a crimson flower bloomed above their neck.' Better yet, keeping the description short and sweet can avoid making a Player squeamish.

If their Table is more comfortable with violence, Directors should encourage players to be more creative and take liberties with their violent actions. There is comedy inherent to violence; slapstick is known for its wacky sense of humor. Violence in a game does not leave any Player physically harmed in the real world. The only harm an Actor can inflict on a Player is emotional, and violence can be used for drama and tension as well. Consider trying to keep the violence just shy of the edge of what is comfortable for your Table without pushing things too far.

Sometimes, however, what a victim *wants* is the ability to exert power over a situation in which they felt powerless before. Remember that adults are familiar with violence; they were likely left helpless in a violent situation before now, and for them, the ability to exact a 'just' revenge helps them to come to terms with their lived experiences. It is important to allow Players to express themselves and their need for control while also keeping a rein on their behaviors; if the Director feels like a Player is being too violent for the table, or a Player feels uncomfortable with the amount of violence expressed by another Player, they should be encouraged to vocalize those feelings. Bottling up emotions is not healthy for the long-term mental health of the Table and nobody should be made to feel uncomfortable because another Player wants to exercise control over their own destiny.

## Discussing Sexual Topics
Moving on to the next of the four categories to discuss, sex and sexual topics! The Neverlands System will rarely shy away from sexual topics in the rulebook itself. Sex is human, and the Fascist is the one who seeks to control sex. They are not shy about their predilections; they see sex as a way to control women, to radicalize men and to ostracize the non-binary. While this book is intended for mature audiences, it is also important to realize that not all Players are mature adults and not all mature adults want to discuss sex in their games. So, how can we approach sex and sexuality without making others uncomfortable?

First, let's handle children. Children do not understand sex and should not be exposed to it at their young age. Children are largely aromantic as well; they understand the *concept* of romance well enough, especially if they're exposed to examples of romance when young. Increasingly more often than in previous generations, children are more familiar with the concept of polycules, gay relationships, cheating spouses, intercultural families and pregnancy. It is important to strike a line between educative and tasteful when discussing sexual or romantic topics around children.

Avoiding simple mistakes, like making sexual innuendos, are easy enough. Children may make silly requests, however, like wanting their Actor to flirt with another Actor. It is important to recognize these requests for what they are-- a desire to engage with the story and give their Actor greater purpose, not a genuine attempt to flirt. For children, romance is witty banter, people who fight and later get along, and in the ending scene they get married and live happily ever after. Teenagers might have a slightly more nuanced view, but don't mistake their confidence for understanding; teenagers are just as useless and confused as any other kid when it comes to sexual topics, and don't let them convince you otherwise.

Children do not want dates (and it would be inappropriate to offer them), they do not want to know about sexual organs and they are definitely not prepared to hear that Fascists are pedophiles. Children are not straight, they're not gay, they don't even known what their own gender is and they have no conception of romance; unless you are a qualified adult in a learning environment, this game should not be used as their first exposure to sex and sexual topics. Respect the intelligence of a child and don't hide the rough details from them; they know what a gay marriage looks like and they won't be impressed if you dance around the subject. But understand their needs are fundamentally different from the needs of adults.

When dealing with *adults* and talking about sexual content, you need to establish very quickly with the Table what kind of Narrative you are all attempting to write. If the goal is to make a polycule of useless twenty-something divines and fairies struggling with society, then it stands to reason that sex and discussion of sex is on the table. That means that, as a fundamental part of the Narrative, Players will be writing Actors who are flirting with other Actors played by other Players. It's the role-playing equivalent of an indirect kiss, and an inexperienced Director can easily see the romance between characters spiral out of control and derail the session.

Grasp very firmly why and ***how*** your players want to engage with sexual content; if for any reason a member of the Table isn't comfortable being voyeur to weird and obscene gestures, respect their wishes. Consent is important, and there's nothing stopping two Players from having a discussion outside of the Table with more lurid or obscene content. Other times, Players might be fine with the half-naked bard who flirts with every monster they meet-- but they don't want to see those Actors engage in sex while they're forced to watch in the Scene. 

For the purpose of avoiding discomfort, a graceful 'fade to black' or other poetic metaphors are more appropriate. It is more evocative and interesting to see two characters leave a tent in a state of partial undress; with more left to the imagination, the Table will have plenty to banter about. Light touches, like a kiss on the cheek or hands held close together, are unlikely to cause anyone but the most prudish discomfort. Professions of love for one another can hold more power than any other Statement in play. Avoiding sexual topics is not always exclusive with a lack of romance!

But there are other, darker sexual topics which lack romance. Rape, sex trafficking, bestiality, pedophilia and other forms of non-consensual sex are real topics worthy of discussion for inclusion. These are sexual acts between two parties in which one party does not have a say; **consent** is the key phrase missing from these encounters. So, how can we discuss these four sub-topics of non-consensual sex without making players uncomfortable?

When we're talking about bestiality, we're not talking about sleeping with a talking donkey or giant telepathic ant, but a creature which is incapable of giving an emphatic 'yes' and intellectually challenged when compared to an adult mortal. Animals are incapable of granting consent and as a general rule, the system suggests avoiding their inclusion altogether. If there is an animal, consider replacing it with a fae; an imaginary creature that can take many forms, in the same way that mythological gods are often written as taking the shape of an animal to romance mortals. This avoids any possibility of bestiality altogether by removing the 'beast.'

When considering how to discuss sex trafficking, consider making it something that Players can do something about. A prostitute kept by his pimp under false pretenses is akin to a princess awaiting rescue; he would very much appreciate his passport back from the pimp, and it is an opportunity for Players to express power over the situation. Be understanding of the inability of those trafficked to fight back against their oppressors. Be cognizant that the ones who are trafficked into sex slavery are just unlucky; anyone could have had the misfortune of being the victim, and it was not their fault for landing in this situation. Some prostitutes may find empowerment through sex work, but these victims are *not* those fortunate prostitutes. They are people, likely kidnapped as children or imprisoned by criminals, forced to sell their body from an unpleasant age.

It does need to be said that an estimated eight million children disappear worldwide every year. This is the result of pedophilia, the third uncomfortable topic that may need to be discussed. It's clear that the Fascist wants to fuck children and that they should not be allowed within nine counties of a child. Their policies overwhelmingly attempt to structure society so they can fuck children; many states allow child marriage, adults work tirelessly to prevent children from receiving sexual education once they reach maturity, and the media children consume teaches sex in a very unhealthy way.

Fascists do not desire children because they want to have sex; they want to fuck children to feel powerful. We don't imagine that Directors will particularly want to vocalize these thoughts, especially out loud; while the section on Discussing Hate Speech in this article goes more into depth about how to phrase these thoughts without endorsing them, our recommendation when talking about this topic is simple:

Provide two methods for Players. They may imprison the Fascist, or they may kill the Fascist.

There's no need to offer other alternatives. By the time a Fascist has started to espouse the ideals of the pedophile, they're long gone. While the long-term project of Fascism necessitates that they fuck and murder children in their craven pursuit for power, most Fascists know this to be intolerable. They don't want to believe their movement is capable of such evils. They genuinely imagine their movement to be for a greater good; that is where the Fascist is wrong. Fascism is a movement of power, and children are the weakest of all of us. They must be put in line, the Fascist reasons, and so it is that they exercise their sexual power over children.

Exercising sexual power without consent is rape. As mentioned previously in this article, one in three women have reported being raped; for both men and women this figure is likely to be much higher than reported. This is a topic that we would suggest Directors avoid even if their group is fine with it; even characters who act like creeps should be handled very carefully. Rape is, unfortunately, an epidemic in our society and we have a culture which encourages rape. Consent is considered secondary to the exercise of power, and the Fascist has no qualms about using this power to hurt others. Avoiding this topic altogether is the only way to be sure that nobody is made uncomfortable, because it is very likely that two members of a five-Player Table have already experienced this event in their own life.

As a final word, consent is extremely important to consider when discussing sexual topics. Always make sure Players are asking for consent from one another before doing anything sexual or taking away the bodily autonomy of another character.

## Discussing Obscene Content
You'll know it when you see it; obscene content is the gross and the puerile. Coarse language, sickness and disease, gore and rot. Mortals are gross, and they probably have cooties; fae aren't much better, since nobody's taught them manners. At some point, sitting the Table down to discuss their boundaries when it comes to obscene content will matter for comfort.

Children are familiar with gross and obscene content; they've spent an inordinate amount of their life without manners or insecurity. Children will smear snot on their shirts, leave their room a mess and say neither 'please' nor 'thank you' when you gift them socks for Christmas, but that doesn't mean they *enjoy* filth. Children will outwardly express discomfort when the Table is too gross for them, and Directors at the Table should listen. For a child, they likely haven't grown up enough to hide their disgust behind nice language, and it's important to not take that feedback personally; listen to their tone and watch their facial expressions.

Children know obscenity when they see it, but to be safe it's best to avoid some forms of obscenity around children-- unless you want them growing up with weird fetishes when they grow older, you've got to keep things vanilla. Avoid Actor nudity, since it asks questions you shouldn't have to answer; keep swears appropriate around children. They don't have a filter on their mouth in the same way adults do, so they'll repeat swears freely and without inhibitions. Children lack exposure to violence, and gore may frighten or traumatize them, so avoid those sorts of obscenity as well as anything else too violent for a child.

If children are *so* vulnerable, what *is* appropriate for them? It's a tough call. Children can comprehend obscenity and will likely find it humorous, but we don't endorse rushing their development. Tasteful obscenity can earn you a laugh; knowing what swears won't get them in trouble at school can also keep them from detention. Try to avoid any obscenity you couldn't see when putting on a cartoon for them to watch.

Teenagers are likely to be even more lenient than most children; they expect harder language, alcohol and drugs. They might see some forms of gore as more 'mature' and appropriate for their age; think about classic slasher movies, and the kinds of content that could be seen in your typical PG-13 film.

It's also important to recognize when the adults at the Table are grossed out; crawling through a sewer system to reach a bandit hideout sounds well and good on paper, but if your Table is especially squeamish you might want to keep descriptions to a minimum. There's no need to include naked bonfires with satyrs if Players would rather they keep their loincloths worn. Obscenity should be taken on a case by case basis; listen to Players when they vocalize their thoughts, and vocalize your discomfort when you find a Scene too gross to play.

## Discussing Hate Speech
Lastly, the Players are fighting Fascists. This is likely to be the hardest role for a Director to embody; they need to vocalize what Fascists believe without endorsing those thoughts. The Fascist is wrong; they believe in hate and dominance over others, and their thought processes are cartoonishly evil. Most mortals have forgotten the cruelty of mankind, but the Neverlands System has not forgotten the horrible thoughts they deemed fit to vocalize.

When writing a Fascist, keep in mind that they only mask their speech when they feel it is unsafe to vocalize their thoughts. In public, they will call themselves apolitical and a moderate; they will claim that 'everyone' agrees with them, that 'thugs' make them uncomfortable and talk about the 'bad part of town' like they weren't picking a minority out of a lineup. When a Fascist does not believe they need to hide, they will let loose their real thoughts. They will tell that they think each and every minority is having kids and doing fraud, that they can't wait to start up new concentration camps for homeless queers, about how *excited* they are to wed and rape a child slave from another country. Fascists are monsters and anyone who can be saved was not yet fully part of their ideological framework.

It is important to portray Fascists as the monsters they are. Avoiding the language they use gives them legitimacy, in the same way that the media gives Fascists legitimacy by exclaiming they have legitimate and reasonable views. This is a game about dismantling the power of the Fascist, but expressing their ideals leaves a bad taste in the mouth of the one giving them a voice. Directors shouldn't feel like they have to say the words of the Fascist out loud. Here are a few strategies for talking about Fascists and their beliefs without saying those beliefs outright:

**For the (Cowardly) Fascist, mask their speech.** (Cowardly) Fascists say they believe that their opinions are widely held, but deep down they know how wretched their opinions truly are; they fear that they are consumed by evil thoughts, and so they speak carefully. (Cowardly) Fascists could claim to be moderate or apolitical; they could make frequent reference to 'thinking what we're all thinking.' They'll not say anything outwardly sexist or racist; they are cowards, after all. Perhaps they'll use coded language, like calling a minority population 'thugs' or a queer subculture 'against god.' They grumble about taxes and call themselves 'fiscally conservative.'

(Cowardly) Fascists will dehumanize the communities they want to harm, but they're afraid to put their gun on the table. They'll be detractors within a community, but they won't threaten to harm anyone; harming anyone would mean risking their reputation and the life they've built. Their complaints are tepid and weak, and they'll make Statements that feel wishy-washy without committing to any one side, even the one representing the Fascist ideology. (Cowardly) Fascists have no ideology to speak of, keyboard warriors and a nuisance more than anything else.

**For the (Belligerent) Fascist, make them incomprehensible.** Fascism is an ideology that fries the brains of anyone exposed to it. The (Belligerent) Fascist is caught in a feedback loop, isolated from their communities because of their intolerant views. They've been forced to communicate with other Fascists and lack any human connection, now that they are unwelcome in modern society. Now they cling tenuously to reality, and those few victims in their life who still hold hope in their hearts the Fascist can change.

Fascists live in fear of losing any last scraps of human connection; wanting to avoid detection, they are forced to mask their speech, their worldview becomes incomprehensible strings of 'masked' speech. Slang for increasingly vile speech is slathered over their words as they learn more and more alien dialects of racism from Fascists in other countries; soon, a simple 'how do you do?' becomes 'am goon tak, mai brit!' Vocal centers break down into sludge, until Players who interact with the (Belligerent) Fascist are only vaguely aware that the person in front of them used to be human like them.

Brainwashing at the root of human language is not difficult to undo; deprogramming the (Belligerent) Fascist only takes reintroducing them to society and making them live along normal people. Once they integrate into a community, they lose their speech impediments and can recover from their crippling social disease; until they've been cured, Directors can indicate that the character has expressed vile opinions, but nobody understood exactly what those words meant.

**For the (Depraved) Fascist, keep them action-oriented.** (Depraved) Fascists have spent so long being (Belligerent) that they've lost their humanity and their soul. With not a single worldly connection, they are untethered from morality and joy; they will stop at nothing to see another creature suffer. No vile action they take can fill the hole in their heart, and that drives them madder still; wealth and fame can only briefly plug the void. They hunger for the suffering of others.

The words of the (Depraved) Fascist are not important to the Narrative; their goal is to inflict injury and harm. Their vile deeds can be kept to rumors and whispers, to dossiers and bounty posters. When a (Depraved) Fascist is present, they don't need to speak at all, except to intimidate their next victims. The (Depraved) Fascist should start Conflict with insults and come ready to kill; they're not looking to engage in debate, they're looking to find a way to ruin their next victim and leave them in tatters.

Whatever is easiest for the (Depraved) Fascist will be their goal. They will join onto bandwagons without believing in any of the words they say, slithering in and out of social groups like a snake. If they have a defenseless victim alone in a dark alleyway, they will act as if there are no consequences. But before they can cross that final line-- before they can next *successfully* assault, or demean, or kill-- Players should always be given a window to enjoin into Conflict with the (Depraved) Fascist. This is the best way to approach the (Depraved) Fascist; never give them a speech at all, only focus on their actions and the behaviors encouraged by their ideology.

For the